---
id: about-goal-posts
title: About Goal Posts
sidebar_label: About Goal Posts
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

## Methodology 

The ideas of creating goal posts rather than a formal roadmap was discussed in our [2024 Barcamp](https://forum.openrefine.org/t/openrefine-2024-barcamp-strategizing-openrefine-roadmap/1633) and in [this thread](https://forum.openrefine.org/t/openrefine-2032-what-direction-does-openrefine-want-to-go/272/).

The current list of goal post has been compiled from the [2024 survey edition](https://forum.openrefine.org/t/results-from-the-feature-prioritization-survey-2024/1847). The list has been enriched from [other items shared on the forum and wiki](https://forum.openrefine.org/t/openrefine-2024-barcamp-strategizing-openrefine-roadmap/1633/2).

## Score Definition 

**Score** are generated by the all-our-idea platform. The score assigned to each feature reflects its relative preference based on head-to-head comparisons made by participants during the survey. Each time a feature was selected over another, it earned a "win." The score is calculated based on the ratio of wins to the total number of vote. Here’s how to interpret the scores:
* **High Scores** (Above 65): Calculated as the mean + 1 standard deviation, these indicate strong community preference. Features with high scores won more frequently, reflecting importance or desirability.
* **Middle Range Scores** (35-65): These scores indicate mixed responses; while often ranked favorably, these features also lost some comparisons, suggesting they are useful but not critical to all users.
* **Low Scores** (Below 35): Calculated as mean - 1 standard deviation, low scores indicate less frequent wins in comparisons. These features may represent more niche requests or less urgent needs. We did not include them on this page. 

## Status Definition 
Through the goal post pages we are using the following status to indicate how you can help make this request progress:
* **Needs Scoping**: Do we want to build this? If yes, what exactly should it do? We need someone to help define the problem and draft high-level requirements.
* **Needs Solution Definition**: We know what needs to be build, now we need to define how it should work, including the technical architecture and user experience flow.
* **Needs UI Design**: The solution is defined, but we need someone to create the actual screen/interface designs.
* **Development Ready**: The feature is fully scoped and designed. A developer should be able to implement it with minimal additional input.


